Add Astronomer recap post (#393)
trinodb/trino.io: _posts/2022-12-20-trino-summit-2022-astronomer-recap.md

---
layout: post
title: "Using Trino with Apache Airflow for (almost) all your data problems"
author: "Philippe Gagnon, Brian Olsen"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
image: /assets/blog/trino-summit-2022/astronomer.jpg
---

As we close in on the final talks from [Trino Summit 2022]({% post_url 
2022-11-21-trino-summit-2022-recap %}), this next talk dives into how to set up
Trino for batch processing. Trino has historically been well-known for providing
fast adhoc analytics queries as opposed to long-running, resource intensive
queries commonly classified as batch or ETL queries. This is due to the fact
that Trino kills queries that run out of resources in favor of lower latency.
Earlier this year, Trino added
[new features](https://trino.io/blog/2022/05/05/tardigrade-launch.html) that
simplifies running batch queries on Trino by introducing a fault-tolerance mode
that only requires restarting a task on failure rather than a stage or the
entire query.

> Batch queries don't typically involve humans in the loop and run asynchronously.

Author: humans in the loop was a commonly used phrase in academic papers circa 2015 meaning it requires human intervention. I'm not sure how common it is now but yeah, probably better to just say that instead :)

These tasks may depend on each other and have a complex workflow. To orchestrate
this complexity, this talk covers using Airflow's new Trino integration to
run Trino batch queries to solve (almost) all your data problems.

<!--more-->

{% youtube xKDN7RUJ5i4 %}

<a class="btn btn-pink btn-md" target="_blank" href="/assets/blog/trino-summit-2022/Trino@Astronomer.pdf">

>   Check out the slides here!

Author: Done for both

</a>

## Recap

This talk covers a fictional trading scenario that initially follows a
traditional warehousing approach to storing their data. This architecture has
data sources that are queried and submitted as raw data into a centralized
warehouse. Within the warehouse itself, the raw data in transformed into data
ready to be consumed.

This model enforces centralization which requires one team that is removed from

> the business use case to run the platform and build the integration between

Reviewer: I think the "one team that is removed from the business use case" is tough-ish to parse here. Maybe offset it with commas or reword.

producers and consumers. As source databases evolve, the central data team must
keep up with these changes and are commonly a bottleneck.

Trino allows you to move the queries as close as possible to the federated data
sources. This removes the labor-intensive process of moving data into stages

> before ingesting it into a central warehouse gets abstracted away. This doesn't

Reviewer: One of "This removes" and "gets abstracted away" needs to go.

> mean that data movement isn't no longer necessity, but it does mean that the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mean that data movement is no longer a necessity, but it does mean that the
```

necessity shifts from an availability concern to a performance and scalability
concern. 

Without investing into more resources, your data professionals are able to work
closely with producers and stakeholders with a shared understanding of the
domain. This increases data literacy and data availability throughout your
organization.

Trino is not only for fast adhoc analytics with a human in the loop, but now 
provides a fault-tolerant execution mode that enables it to run resource

> intensive batch jobs. This paired with the federation capabilities make Trino

Reviewer: ```suggestion
intensive batch jobs. This, paired with the federation capabilities, make Trino
```
